0. Reaction to the paper “No Silver Bullet - Essence and Accidents - of Software Engineering”:

i) In my opinion, conceptualization is actually NOT the difficult part, so solving the accidental
(incidental) part IS in fact a huge deal.
ii) I think generative AI (40 years after publication) does serve as an adequate silver bullet.
iii) Reading the first paper, at one point it occurred to me: maybe the conceptual part can be divided
into two parts. One which the paper describes as the structural part, the architecture, and the second is I
think just what functionality you want the program to have. AI can totally take care of the first one if it
knows what functionality you want.
Caution. Usually, AI-generated software for non-expert users (not software engineers) doesn’t give you
full control over details, so maybe one area of innovation is to adapt it so it does.

1. In your opinion, what aspects of software engineering continue to be particularly challenging, hence
worth your personal scientific interest?

Response.
According to the explanations above, I believe continuing to resolve accidential (incidental) problems
of software engineering will still continue to be very fruitful for a long time to come, however I am not
certain that things I classify as accidental would not be considered essential by the author.
Naturally, what I describe is basically pushing for further automation, which would also demand better
interfaces with the developer for more speed. Research in programming languages, as well as human
computer interaction specialized for the developer, a sort of developer computer interaction if you will,
additionally in visualization. The latter would involve all possible forms of diagrams which the paper
ironically dismissed the example of flow charts from.

2. In your experience (coursework and jobs), how do you feel AI transform your practice? What looks
positive, negative, and neutral?

Response.
The speedup is very positive, but also the cleanliness of the code is what makes it so great. It follows
standard templates of best practice, is uniform, and really looks machine made instead of hand made
which is of course neater as with any industrial part.
As mentioned before, removing the current lack of full detailed control for the developer is a main
challenge. Furthermore, occasional inaccuracies e.g. in meeting requirements are what prevent us from
using fell-fledge developer agents because each small piece of code needs to undergo manual
verification before integrated.
For neutral, I won’t contribute a personal opinion, but the paper points to design choices that will in the
end remain the human’s responsibility.

3. In your opinion, how the 4 SE essential aspects are being challenged by AI? Which accidential
aspects seemed to have been mitigated by AI?

Response.
The main role of AI is foremost aspect #2 development (code generation), but the aspect it makes the
biggest impact and helps us the most with is aspect #4 evolution, because it can swiftly track all
dependencies and apply changes to keep everything consistent. This is precisely the purpose of
automation. And finally, aspect #3 validation is of course an area where automation through AI can also
help a lot, not only automatic generation of a test suite, but also designing and selecting them.
It is only the first aspect, requirements engineering that remains a mostly human burden, although AI
can still contribute to that at least indirectly.
